I felt were the most important at that time that I
had something to do with was, first was the
Academy's Committee on Oceanography, which was
either its second or third committee on
oceanography, I forgot which.
This again was a brainchild, I think, of Gordon's
and Gordon, Lil, and myself. We'd been putting
together a program in the Navy, a long-range
program. And we thought there ought to be a little
broader look at this, that
this should be done on a national basis. And we
thought it would be appropriate to have an Academy
Committee on Oceanography. So I went over and
talked to John Coleman, who was executive officer
of the Academy at that time.
And I guess Bronk was president of the Academy. And
Bronk agreed to it. And
the question was who to get as chairman. And John
Coleman picked up the phone and called Harrison
Brown and asked him if he'd agree to be chairman.
And he did. And I've forgotten who was on the
original committee, but it was people like
Columbus Islin and Roger Revelle, Morris Ewing,
Sumner Pike, Harrison Brown. I'm sure there's a
list of these around. Dick Better would know it.
And when it was established, they invited Dick to
be its executive secretary. And he's been there
ever since. And that has to be close to 20 years now.
So it's been going a very long time. And that
committee sat down and spent many months of
deliberations. And although I was not a member, I
sat in on virtually every meeting as government
representative. And they put together a thick
report on oceanography. I think it was called
Oceanography 1960
to 1970 or something like that. And it had a major
impact on the whole business. I think it was the
guiding thing. I like to think that what we had done
in the Navy had an impact also. We put together a
program called 10OC, or 10 Years in Oceanography,
for the Navy, which had a long range projection of
growth in oceanography, new ships, and so on in the
business. And the Navy stuck to this pretty well.
for most of the 10 years. It essentially became a
part of the Academy's committee. I think it was
about this time that the administration
or the bureaucracy began to
grow significantly in oceanography. One of the
things that we found was becoming necessary was
that oceanography was being done not only in ONR,
but in many agencies of the government. And there
was a need to coordinate this. So we began getting a
group together that was called the Interagency
Committee on Oceanography, I believe, ICO. At
first, people got together on the working level
and just tried to plan programs, coordinate
things, and so forth. And it began to grow, and we
began to get the heads of agencies interested in
this. And I remember the first day that Jim
Wakeland came on board as Assistant Secretary of
the Navy for R&D. I went and spent something like
six hours with him and told him all about
oceanography, what the Navy was doing in it, and
the fact that we'd set up this interagency
committee. We wanted him to chair it and so on. He
immediately became interested in this, and we
became pretty good friends.
I think it was about three weeks after that date,
Eisenhower asked him to brief the cabinet on
oceanography. So he got me to go along with him. And
it was quite an interesting day. Again, Jim hadn't
been in the Navy very long, so he didn't know much
about it. But we had a briefing all prepared. And I
sort of went along to answer questions if some came
up that he couldn't field. And I remember to this
day when Eisenhower walked into the cabinet
meeting looked down the agenda and he says, oh, I
see we have oceanography on the agenda today. He
says, where's Morris Ewing? I said, Morris is up in
Columbia where he belongs. He sort of chuckled. It
was an interesting experience to go through that.
Was Eisenhower sympathetic? Yes, he was. Not much
came out. It was more of an information type
briefing, You know, oceanography was then
becoming a word that people were hearing about and
wondering what the hell it meant. So they just
wanted to find out what was included and what the
country was doing. And it didn't hurt us to go
there, that's for sure. But again, we were on that
pretty steep part of the budget curve or science
going up in interest at that time. So you didn't
have to justify things too much. Were you in that
famous meeting where Spiro Agnew said, what I'm
really interested in is space, and left? No. That
was the meeting of the, when they set up, I forgot
what it's called now, the council, I guess, that
had the heads of all the departments and the vice
president chaired, and I suspect that was when he
walked into that meeting. Humphrey, who preceded
him, was very sympathetic to oceanography. And as
you know, he was up here and went out to sea with us
for a couple of days. Very bright, interested guy.
He just followed everything very closely.
I don't know what other committees that were going
at that time. Oh, one of the subcommittees of the
ICO that I got interested in was... was called
PIPICO, or at that time was the
Panel on International Participation of the ICO.
And this group actually
was the group of agencies that got together and
provided the general government position on
international meetings, and it's still doing it
to this day. consultant on it, and I get their
material on a fairly regular basis. And I'm still
very active in this. And this came about because a
meeting that Roger and Roger Lavelle, John Lyman,
and I went to with UNESCO many years ago decided
that they'd set up a committee on oceanography.
We went to a preparatory meeting in Copenhagen, as
I recall. And I couldn't tell you the dates on that
now. It must have been in the late 50s.
As a result of that meeting, they set up IOC, the
Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission,
under UNESCO. I was very active in that for many
years. And for many years, it was a fairly active
organization that was promoting good science and
the interchange of information between science.
But as the law of the sea began to raise its ugly
head, it become more and more involved in
nationalistic types of things, and the law of the
sea, and spent more of its time trying to
reorganize itself than thinking about
oceanography. became disillusioned with it and
stopped going to it. But the ICO now, or PIPICO,
which is part of ICO in our government, was the U.S.
input into that, even at that stage. It still
maintains its input.
I know this is a rather dumb question, but In terms
of law of the sea, do you intend to make overtures to
underdeveloped countries and maybe bring them in
here to Woods Hole or bring oceanographers so that
you can establish the sort of contacts that will
allow you to do joint oceanography off of, let's
say, places like Chile or Brazil? Oh, actually,
that's undoubtedly yes. We've done that through
our whole history long before the law of the sea was
a problem. We've worked with scientists from
other countries and have developed quite close
relationships, not only developing countries,
but developed countries. And we have a number of
people that come spend some time here and then go
back and vice versa. Our people go over there.
We're particularly interested in developing
countries and trying to help them get started.
Of course, we realize one of the side benefits on
this is if you get to know the people, the chances of
working off their shores with them is much simpler
if you have somebody to go to that you know there.
But that's been a mode of operation that we've had
for many years. I see it coming to being more
important in the future. I think the law of the sea
is really going to finish down to that may be the
only way of doing research. Obviously, I know
you're not a mystic, but did you anticipate the Law
of the Sea occurring while you were at ONR working
with UNESCO? Did you have hints that something
like this was going to occur? Oh, there was another
Law of the Sea conference, as you recall, in 1959, I
think, which they signed the famous treaty that
set the limits of the 200-meter limit in this far
beyond that that admits to exploitation, as I
recall, some language similar to this. And the
people that were involved in that, and that was Don
McKernan and Benny Schaefer, Wib Chapman, and so
on,
were both pushing for a law of the sea and afraid,
another law of the sea conference, and afraid that
Another one would occur. There was a great
question in everybody's mind as to timing on when
you should have this. And then it got somewhat
taken out of people's hands by Pardo's statement
at the UN saying that seabed is a property of
mankind. And it stirred up a lot of interest.
quite independent of what the scientists wanted
to do about bringing about a law of the sea
conference.
It got started in UN, and you couldn't stop it if you
tried. I'm not sure you're ever going to stop it or
it's ever going to get solved. I mean, it's going.
While we're talking about the Illinois, there's a
very important point I want you to make some
comments on. Instrumentation and the
development of ocean arms. My impression is that
few agencies contribute quite so much to the
development and sophistication of instruments
for oceanography as does ONR.
Tell me how you went about that. How did you decide
to fund new instruments? What sort of proposals
did you receive? What kind of people did you try to
deal with? Problems you tried to solve? Well, I
think The proposals at that time were not nearly as
elaborate as they are now. And I think the reason in
part for that is that there were a lot of new ideas. A
lot of new technology was emerging. And
it was much easier to identify some of these.
I suspect ONR has supported a lot of technology and
a lot of development technology. It seems to me
that it's hand in glove with doing science so that
you don't do it for its own sake. Although I know of a
few projects that we undertook that some of them
I've never been particularly happy with. But we
did undertake them in its technological
developments.
Again, I think this sort of refers back to an
earlier point you made, that the decision as to
whether you wanted to invest some of your money
into equipment or not rested with the people that
were running things. And they felt it made more
sense to put some money to develop equipment that
would be used by a broad group of people. It went
that way. And it went that way not because any group
proposed it, but there was a general feeling among
the whole community that we needed this kind of
equipment. But the people didn't get together and
put in a single proposal. The feeling was there, so
ONR took the bit in the teeth, set up a group, and
went out and would run a program like that and get it
going. Now, I'm sure you're aware that... It was
ONR that got the deep-sea drilling the Glomar
Challenger off. Again, this was a little group in
our group there. We had a group in ONR called the
American Miscellaneous Society, which started
in our branch in ONR. And I'm sure you've heard the
story of the famous wine breakfast at Walter
Monk's. Well, there were a number of us out at
Walter Monk's house. Again, it's hard to put the
date on this. But we were discussing what are the
new things that need to be done in oceanography.
And I remember Gordon Lill was there and myself. I
think Betty Bowden from Scripps was there and
Walter.
The whole idea of the fact that the technology had
reached a point in
two places. One, that onshore you could drill to
great depths. They had just drilled a well to about
30,000 feet in Texas. And they were just beginning
to come out with drilling platforms to drill at
sea. So there was a possibility of marrying these
two technologies, one deep drilling and drilling
at sea. that maybe you could drill to 30,000 feet at
sea. And if you could do that, there were all sorts
of interesting scientific problems that you
could come into. So as a result of this, the
American Miscellaneous Society decided to put in
a proposal to NSF to support this. And it got
supported for a committee to study it. And I guess
finally got to be an AMSOC committee of the
National Academy of Sciences for a while that,
again, a lot of these same characters keep coming
up. Bill Bascom was
head of this group, and they developed plans for
the Moho. Now, somewhere along the line in
developing the Moho, a lot of divergent views came
out. There was one group of people that felt very
strongly the way to proceed was to to build a small
ship and do some sediment drilling, and gradually
build bigger and bigger ships. And as you got
better, go to deeper depths. There was another
group that felt that the way to do it was to start out
with the platform that could do the final job, but
started drilling on shallower depths. But you had
the platform which you were improving all the
time. Harry Hess of Princeton sort of headed the
latter group, and Hollis Hedberg also of
Princeton headed the former group. And Walter
Monk was in—well, I'm not sure which group Walter
Monk was in. I think he was in the one that preferred
going with the smaller ones bigger. But Moho
decided to go the other way, and that was the side
that I happened to be on in that.
got to the point where they let a contract for
construction of the platform in San Diego. Then
the other end of it ran into trouble. The Science
Foundation was letting this out for contract, and
they had several bids on it. And as you recall,
Lyndon Johnson was president at the time and was
from Texas, and there was a couple of powerful
congressmen from Texas. And for one reason or
another, the contract ended up in Texas with Brown
and Root. This got Gordon Allen of Colorado very
unhappy. Apparently one of the other bidders was
from his state, and so he raised a fuss on this, and
eventually they canceled. And a lot of things were
happening. The cost was escalating. The cost had
gotten up estimated cost of about $100 million, I
think, about that time. There was a lot of
discussion about the propriety of the way the
contract was handled. There was division in the
scientific community on it. And as a result, the
whole thing collapsed. But a lot came out of it,
because the ocean sediment coring program,
people agreed that the idea made a lot of sense. So
it sort of backed off. The ocean sediment coring
with the Glomar Challenger came out of that. On the
other end, all the design work that went into it are
the things that these semi-submersible
platforms were based on, so the technology was
utilized by industry on it, and I think None of the
money was really wasted on it. It really spurred on
the oil industry. Now the oil industry is putting
just so much more money into that than the
government ever would. But this was kind of a thing
that helped get it all started at the beginning.
But that whole program started with ONR funding
the early stages of it.
I remember one meeting we had on this that John
Mecham, the oil man who had, I think, drilled, his
company had drilled a hole to 30,000 feet, came up
to Washington, and we were out at Bill Ruby's
house, who was in the geological survey in
Washington. We had a fairly large meeting out
there, 15 or 20 people, but there were some
interesting people there, and apparently the FBI
had had the whole house under surveillance that
night. for which nobody ever found out a reason
why.
That was one of the, you know, these are kind of
examples of the exciting kind of things that O&R
was into at the time. You could do a lot of things
like this, and these were big step forwards in the
business that they were making. They were
gambles. But the people were willing to take it and
were willing to put their reputations at stake on
these. And I think everybody plays the game much
safer now. I want to jump ahead of the story a little
bit, and I want to drop back. But if you were to list
what you thought to be the technology, the
instrumentation side of technology, which you
developed the most in your career as
oceanographer, what would you choose?
During my whole career— During your whole career,
what instruments were developed which you think
brought the most to the science of oceanography?
Well,
that's a tough one. I think one couldn't help but
say the computer. That wasn't developed for the
oceanographer or by the oceanographer, but
that's been probably the biggest tool he's used,
because everybody uses it in one form or another.
I think the current meters and the arrays of
current meters that have been developed here have
been a very significant part in understanding the
oceans.
I think seismology
has made some big changes.
Let me say one thing about the geophysical
measurements at sea. Some of these had never been
made at sea before, and people like Morris Ewing
and Morris Ewing started seismic measurements at
sea. I think that Scripps started the magnetic
measurements,
Warzel gravity measurements, and Bullard and I,
the heat flow. When these were first made, they
were very difficult to make. But as soon as you
began making them, you found out they were much
easier to make in the ocean than on land. And very
rapidly, you develop more information about the
ocean floor than you have about the land. And since
the geology of the ocean floor is simpler than the
geology of the land masses, We've been able to
understand the geology of the Earth primarily
because you've developed all of these
geophysical tools that you can use at sea. And this
has probably been the most significant thing that
has happened in oceanography during my history,
is what we've learned about the sea floor, plate
tectonics, sea floor spreading, and so on. And
it's come about from the simple fact that
geophysical measurements, once you learn to make
them at sea, you can get them in vast quantities
very fast thereafter, and you get a much better
picture of it. And I think all the technology
that's gone into those has been tremendously
important. Now, the second question actually
relates to that. You've led into it in a different
way. I need for you to say a few words about you and
Bullard's work in the heat wave flow, because
that's very important to the history of
oceanography. How did you get interested in it?
What do you think its significance was? How did you
intellectually develop it? What problems did you
face? Well, I got interested in it very simply. As I
mentioned earlier, I by chance happened at
Scripps the same time as Teddy Bullard had come to
spend a year there to work on heat flow. I knew
nothing about it prior to that time.
What had happened is that there had been something
of the order of two dozen measurements of heat flow
that had been made at on land, particularly in
mines and in boreholes, where they measured the
temperature at different depths and calculated
the heat flowing out of the earth. But that only
represented kind of a small fraction of the whole
earth. And you had 2 thirds of it the oceans that
there were no measurements for. So it was critical
to see what the heat flow was in the oceans. The main
driving force behind this is that we knew that the
continental rocks were more acidic and they
contained rocks that had higher contents of
potassium and radioactivity in them. And it was
generally felt that the heat that was flowing from
the earth was generated primarily by the decay of
radioactive material in the crust of the earth
about 30 kilometers. And the rest was from the
original cooling of the earth. Now, we knew under
the oceans that the crust was thinner, and we knew
that the material had less contact with
radioactivity, so we anticipated that the heat
flow would be smaller under the ocean, but we
wanted to really find this out. And in 1950, when we
got our first measurements, it turned out it
wasn't so. All the early measurements showed that
we were getting roughly the same heat flow in the
ocean floor as was measured in the continents. An
interesting thing about the early heat flow
measurements was that on the Capricorn
expedition that I went on, we picked up a pattern of
heat flow that showed normal values in most areas.
But as you approached a ridge, you found that the
heat flow was very high on the ridge. three to four
times the normal heat flow. And then as you went off
the ridge, it went back to normal, and then it went a
little below normal and then back to the normal
values. And this pattern was found in the very
earliest measurements of something like 30
measurements that were made, and now there's
something like 3,000 measurements, which is just
borne out this pattern. Of course, we found a lot of
different things, but the main pattern of heat
flow was found by the very early measurements,
actually. In my early work, we were thinking there
were convection cells under the ocean floor. Dave
Griggs at UCLA and other people had thought in
terms of convection cells. And when we detected
this high heat flow over the East Pacific rise, we
thought that this was an upwelling of heat coming
up from a convection cell. And I actually
postulated maybe it was the way continents were
formed, that you had this material come up, and it
gradually built a lot of it up, and it made a new
continent. which of course was not correct, but
the whole idea of it being on a convection cell has
turned out to be true. The convection cell just
goes all the way over to the edges. As a matter of
fact, on our early measurements, we made
measurements of the heat flow between the East
Pacific rise and South America there, and we got
high heat flows on the rise, and they went down low
to very low under the trench, which is the pattern
that you would expect from a convection cell. I
think this has been one of the key parts in coming up
with the whole study on plate tectonics. It's not
the whole thing, or it's not a critical one, but
it's that compared with the magnetics, the
seismic, the gravity. It's when you put the whole
works together, the picture began to emerge, and I
know a lot of people have tried to set a date when
plate tectonics was born or seafloor spreading,
and I think that's probably not a It's a thing that
has evolved over many years, and a lot of
measurements. It was just putting a lot of pieces
together, and finally somebody got a key piece in,
and you could see the picture on it. But it was a lot
of work of a lot of people that developed that. And I
like to think that the heat flow was one of the
important factors in it. At least it was the first
heat flow at sea, in any case. And I think it was
significant.